docs/javascript-notes.md, before:

# freeCodeCamp JavaScript course notes

## Read me first

[JavaScript course on freeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/javascript-algorithms-and-data-structures/) | [JavaScript Bootcamp playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLU3RKvMpgrSEswU7f9pg6EYaO1s944CDI) | [JavaScript on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)

While it is not strictly necessary, it is a good practice to type the semicolon `;` at the end of each line.

## Comments

[Comments on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/JavaScript_basics#comments)

```js
// This is a single-line comment

let variableName; // This is also a single-line comment, next to some code

/* And this is a multi-line comment.
let variableName
See? You can even comment out code
so that it doesn't execute! */
```

## Variables, constants

[Variables on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/Variables#content)

- `var` - **variable**; you can declare (create) it multiple times
- `let` - **variable**; you can declare it only once, but you can change its value later
- `const` - **constant**; you can declare it only once, its value will not change

It is recommended to use `let` for variables, since you won't be able to accidentally declare it multiple times.

```js
let myVariable;             // Declare a variable
        // Use what's called a "camelCase" to name your variables
myVariable = "Hello World"; // Assign a value to a variable
myVariable = 12;            // You can assign numbers without quotation marks
```

```js
var myName = "Andrew";      // Declare a variable
var myName = "Barbara";     // You can declare a "var" multiple times
        // Note that you can't do the same with a "let"
```

```js
const MY_CONSTANT;
/* It is a good practice to name constants using 
what is called a "SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE", so that 
you can easily tell them apart from variables */
```

```js
myName = myVariable;        // You can assign the value of one variable to another

let decimalValue = 3.59;    // You can assign a decimal value to your variable as well
```

## Console logging

[console.log on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/console/log#content)

You can print out anything you want to the JavaScript console - a string, a number, a variable, a constant, a mathematical equation, etc.

Very useful for checking the value of a variable

```js
console.log("Hello World");  // Prints "Hello World" to the console
console.log(myVariable);     // Prints the (declared above) number 12 to the console
console.log(5 + 6);          // Prints the number 11
```

## Mathematical operations

[Arithmetic operators on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#arithmetic_operators)

```js
let addVar = 5 + 10;     // Value is 15
let subVar = 16 - 9;     // Value is 7
let mulVar = 2 * 12;     // Value is 24
let divVar = 21 / 7;     // Value is 3

addVar++;            // Increment the "addVar" variable - same as adding 1 to it
subVar--;            // Same as above, but we are decrementing - subtracting 1

let myVar = subVar * 5; // Multiply the value of subVar by 5 - we get 35

let remainder = 11 % 3; // Gives the remainder of the division of two numbers
        // Value is 2 (3 * 3 = 9; 11 - 9 = 2)
```

### Prefix and postfix increment/decrement

[Increment and decrement on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#increment_and_decrement)

```js
let a = 1;

// Postfix
console.log(a++);   // First, 'a' is used to print to console, and THEN incremented
        // Above statement prints 1

console.log(a);     // This statement prints 2 (because we incremented it above)

// Prefix
console.log(++a);   // 'a' is incremented first, then the new value of 'a' is printed
        // Above statement prints 3
```

### Compound assignment

[Assignment operators on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#assignment_operators)

```js
let myVar = 1;

myVar += 5;     /* Value is 6
This is the same as:
myVar = myVar + 5
*/

myVar -= 2;     // Value is 4
// myVar = myVar - 2

myVar *= 2;     // Value is 8
// myVar = myVar * 2

myVar /= 4;     // Value is 2
// myVar = myVar / 2
```

## Strings

[Strings on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#contents)

### Quotation marks

[Text formatting on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Text_formatting#content)

```js
// You can escape literal quotes inside your string using a backslash
let myVar = "This is a \"JavaScript\" course.";
console.log(myVar);     // This is a "JavaScript" course.

// You can also use single quotes
let doubleQuoteStr = "This is a string"; 
let singleQuoteStr = 'This is also a string';

myVar = 'Adam said, "Hi, Barbara!"'
console.log(myVar);     // Adam said, "Hi, Barbara!"
```

### Escape sequences

[Escape sequences on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#escape_sequences)

| Code |      Output      |
|------|------------------|
| \'   | single quote     |
| \"   | double quote     |
| \\\\ | backslash        |
| \n   | new line         |
| \r   | carriage return  |
| \t   | tab              |
| \b   | word boundary    |
| \f   | form feed        |

```js
let myStr = "FirstLine\n\t\\SecondLine\nThirdLine";

console.log(myStr);

/* Output:
FirstLine
        \SecondLine
ThirdLine
*/
```

### Concatenation

[Addition on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Addition#content)

```js
let myStr = "I come first. " + "I come second.";
        // Notice the space at the end of the first string

console.log(myStr);     // I come first. I come second.
```

```js
let myStr = "I come first. ";
myStr += "I come second.";

console.log(myStr);     // I come first. I come second.
```

### Constructing strings with variables

```js
const ourName = "freeCodeCamp";
const ourStr = "Hello, our name is " + ourName + ", how are you?";

console.log(ourStr);    // Hello, our name is freeCodeCamp, how are you?
```

```js
const anAdjective = "awesome!";
let ourStr = "freeCodeCamp is ";
ourStr += anAdjective;

console.log(ourStr);    // freeCodeCamp is awesome!
```

### Operations on strings

[String objects on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Text_formatting#string_objects)

```js
const lastName = "Lovelace";

// Find the length of a string
let lastNameLength = lastName.length;
console.log(lastNameLength);    // Value is 8 - word "Lovelace" is 8 characters long

// Use bracket notation to find the first character in a string
let firstLetterOfLastName = lastName[0];        // Index 0 is our first letter
console.log(firstLetterOfLastName);             // Value is "L"
```

***IMPORTANT!*** In bracket notation we start counting from zero (*Zero-based indexing*; this is common for most modern programming languages). That means, for example:

- 1st character is at `[0]`
- 2nd character is at `[1]`
- 3rd character is at `[2]`
- 7th character is at `[6]`
- 30th character is at `[29]`

```js
// Use bracket notation to find the Nth character in a string
let thirdLetterOfLastName = lastName[2];        // Index 2 is our third letter
console.log(thirdLetterOfLastName);             // Value is "v"

// Use bracket notation to find the last character in a string
let lastLetterOfLastName = lastName[lastName.length - 1];     
        // Remember to subtract 1 since we are counting from 0!
console.log(lastLetterOfLastName);              // Value is "e"
```

#### String mutability

In JavaScript, `String` values are immutable, which means that they cannot be altered once created.

```js
// This code will throw an error
let myStr = "Bob";
myStr[0] = "J";
// TypeError: 0 is read-only
```

This does *not* mean that `myStr` cannot be changed, just that the individual characters of a *string literal* cannot be changed. The only way to change `myStr` would be to assign it with a new string.

```js
// This code is correct
let myStr = "Bob";
myStr = "Job";
// Value is "Job"
```

## Arrays

[Arrays on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)

```js
// An array can hold multiple values
const sandwich = ["peanut butter", "jelly", "bread", 2];

// You can nest arrays inside other arrays
const teams = [["Bulls", 23], ["White Sox", 45]];
```

TODO: Multi-dimensional arrays

### Modify array data

```js
let myArray = [2, 3, 4];
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the array in console [ 2, 3, 4 ]

// Add element to the end of the array
myArray.push(5);
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 2, 3, 4, 5 ]

// Remove last element of the array
myArray.pop();
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 2, 3, 4 ]

// Remove element at the beginning of the array
myArray.shift();
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 3, 4 ]

// Add element at the beginning of the array
myArray.unshift(2);
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 2, 3, 4 ]
```

Commit message:

Add multi-dimensional arrays and array indexing
Added more of a description of arrays in general as well.

docs/javascript-notes.md, after:

# freeCodeCamp JavaScript course notes

## Read me first

[JavaScript course on freeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/learn/javascript-algorithms-and-data-structures/) | [JavaScript Bootcamp playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLU3RKvMpgrSEswU7f9pg6EYaO1s944CDI) | [JavaScript on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)

While it is not strictly necessary, it is a good practice to type the semicolon `;` at the end of each line.

## Comments

[Comments on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/JavaScript_basics#comments)

```js
// This is a single-line comment

let variableName; // This is also a single-line comment, next to some code

/* And this is a multi-line comment.
let variableName
See? You can even comment out code
so that it doesn't execute! */
```

## Variables, constants

[Variables on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/Variables#content)

- `var` - **variable**; you can declare (create) it multiple times
- `let` - **variable**; you can declare it only once, but you can change its value later
- `const` - **constant**; you can declare it only once, its value will not change

It is recommended to use `let` for variables, since you won't be able to accidentally declare it multiple times.

```js
let myVariable;             // Declare a variable
        // Use what's called a "camelCase" to name your variables
myVariable = "Hello World"; // Assign a value to a variable
myVariable = 12;            // You can assign numbers without quotation marks
```

```js
var myName = "Andrew";      // Declare a variable
var myName = "Barbara";     // You can declare a "var" multiple times
        // Note that you can't do the same with a "let"
```

```js
const MY_CONSTANT;
/* It is a good practice to name constants using 
what is called a "SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE", so that 
you can easily tell them apart from variables */
```

```js
myName = myVariable;        // You can assign the value of one variable to another

let decimalValue = 3.59;    // You can assign a decimal value to your variable as well
```

## Console logging

[console.log on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/console/log#content)

You can print out anything you want to the JavaScript console - a string, a number, a variable, a constant, a mathematical equation, etc.

Very useful for checking the value of a variable

```js
console.log("Hello World");  // Prints "Hello World" to the console
console.log(myVariable);     // Prints the (declared above) number 12 to the console
console.log(5 + 6);          // Prints the number 11
```

## Mathematical operations

[Arithmetic operators on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#arithmetic_operators)

```js
let addVar = 5 + 10;     // Value is 15
let subVar = 16 - 9;     // Value is 7
let mulVar = 2 * 12;     // Value is 24
let divVar = 21 / 7;     // Value is 3

addVar++;            // Increment the "addVar" variable - same as adding 1 to it
subVar--;            // Same as above, but we are decrementing - subtracting 1

let myVar = subVar * 5; // Multiply the value of subVar by 5 - we get 35

let remainder = 11 % 3; // Gives the remainder of the division of two numbers
        // Value is 2 (3 * 3 = 9; 11 - 9 = 2)
```

### Prefix and postfix increment/decrement

[Increment and decrement on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#increment_and_decrement)

```js
let a = 1;

// Postfix
console.log(a++);   // First, 'a' is used to print to console, and THEN incremented
        // Above statement prints 1

console.log(a);     // This statement prints 2 (because we incremented it above)

// Prefix
console.log(++a);   // 'a' is incremented first, then the new value of 'a' is printed
        // Above statement prints 3
```

### Compound assignment

[Assignment operators on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators#assignment_operators)

```js
let myVar = 1;

myVar += 5;     /* Value is 6
This is the same as:
myVar = myVar + 5
*/

myVar -= 2;     // Value is 4
// myVar = myVar - 2

myVar *= 2;     // Value is 8
// myVar = myVar * 2

myVar /= 4;     // Value is 2
// myVar = myVar / 2
```

## Strings

[Strings on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#contents)

### Quotation marks

[Text formatting on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Text_formatting#content)

```js
// You can escape literal quotes inside your string using a backslash
let myVar = "This is a \"JavaScript\" course.";
console.log(myVar);     // This is a "JavaScript" course.

// You can also use single quotes
let doubleQuoteStr = "This is a string"; 
let singleQuoteStr = 'This is also a string';

myVar = 'Adam said, "Hi, Barbara!"'
console.log(myVar);     // Adam said, "Hi, Barbara!"
```

### Escape sequences

[Escape sequences on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#escape_sequences)

| Code |      Output      |
|------|------------------|
| \'   | single quote     |
| \"   | double quote     |
| \\\\ | backslash        |
| \n   | new line         |
| \r   | carriage return  |
| \t   | tab              |
| \b   | word boundary    |
| \f   | form feed        |

```js
let myStr = "FirstLine\n\t\\SecondLine\nThirdLine";

console.log(myStr);

/* Output:
FirstLine
        \SecondLine
ThirdLine
*/
```

### Concatenation

[Addition on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Addition#content)

```js
let myStr = "I come first. " + "I come second.";
        // Notice the space at the end of the first string

console.log(myStr);     // I come first. I come second.
```

```js
let myStr = "I come first. ";
myStr += "I come second.";

console.log(myStr);     // I come first. I come second.
```

### Constructing strings with variables

```js
const ourName = "freeCodeCamp";
const ourStr = "Hello, our name is " + ourName + ", how are you?";

console.log(ourStr);    // Hello, our name is freeCodeCamp, how are you?
```

```js
const anAdjective = "awesome!";
let ourStr = "freeCodeCamp is ";
ourStr += anAdjective;

console.log(ourStr);    // freeCodeCamp is awesome!
```

### Operations on strings

[String objects on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Text_formatting#string_objects)

```js
const lastName = "Lovelace";

// Find the length of a string
let lastNameLength = lastName.length;
console.log(lastNameLength);    // Value is 8 - word "Lovelace" is 8 characters long

// Use bracket notation to find the first character in a string
let firstLetterOfLastName = lastName[0];        // Index 0 is our first letter
console.log(firstLetterOfLastName);             // Value is "L"
```

***IMPORTANT!*** In bracket notation we start counting from zero (*Zero-based indexing*; this is common for most modern programming languages). That means, for example:

- 1st character is at `[0]`
- 2nd character is at `[1]`
- 3rd character is at `[2]`
- 7th character is at `[6]`
- 30th character is at `[29]`

```js
// Use bracket notation to find the Nth character in a string
let thirdLetterOfLastName = lastName[2];        // Index 2 is our third letter
console.log(thirdLetterOfLastName);             // Value is "v"

// Use bracket notation to find the last character in a string
let lastLetterOfLastName = lastName[lastName.length - 1];     
        // Remember to subtract 1 since we are counting from 0!
console.log(lastLetterOfLastName);              // Value is "e"
```

#### String mutability

In JavaScript, `String` values are immutable, which means that they cannot be altered once created.

```js
// This code will throw an error
let myStr = "Bob";
myStr[0] = "J";
// TypeError: 0 is read-only
```

This does *not* mean that `myStr` cannot be changed, just that the individual characters of a *string literal* cannot be changed. The only way to change `myStr` would be to assign it with a new string.

```js
// This code is correct
let myStr = "Bob";
myStr = "Job";
// Value is "Job"
```

## Arrays

[Arrays on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array)

Arrays can be thought of as lists in JavaScript.
An array can hold multiple values, even if they are not the same data type (string, integer, boolean, etc.) within that array.

```js
const sandwich = ["peanut butter", "jelly", "bread", 2, false];
```

### Multi-dimensional Arrays

Arrays can be nested within other arrays. This is called a multi-dimensional array.

```js
const teams = [["Bulls", 23], ["White Sox", 45]];
```

### Access Array data

Much like getting the value of a single character in a string, accessing the full values within an array use square brackets and an index number.

```js
const months = ["January", "February", "March"];
console.log(months[0]);  // Zero-indexing applies here as well. This will print "January" in the console.
```

We can access values in a multi-dimensional array as well:

```js
const daysInMonth = [["January", 31], ["February", 28], ["March", 31]];
console.log(daysInMonth[2][0]); // This will print "March" in the console.
console.log(daysInMonth[1][1]); // This will print 28 in the console.
```


### Modify Array data

```js
let myArray = [2, 3, 4];
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the array in console [ 2, 3, 4 ]

// Add element to the end of the array
myArray.push(5);
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 2, 3, 4, 5 ]

// Remove last element of the array
myArray.pop();
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 2, 3, 4 ]

// Remove element at the beginning of the array
myArray.shift();
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 3, 4 ]

// Add element at the beginning of the array
myArray.unshift(2);
console.log(myArray);   // Will print the new array in console  [ 2, 3, 4 ]
```
